feat: JWT Authenticator (#195)
codeigniter4/shield: docs/addons/jwt.md

# JWT Authentication

> To use JWT Authentication, you need additional setup and configuration.

Author: Added explanation of JWT and how-to.

    ```php
    // new file - app/Config/AuthJWT.php
    <?php

    declare(strict_types=1);

    namespace Config;

    use CodeIgniter\Shield\Config\AuthJWT as ShieldAuthJWT;

    /**
     * JWT Authenticator Configuration
     */
    class AuthJWT extends ShieldAuthJWT
    {
        // ...
    }
    ```

3. If your **app/Config/Auth.php** is not up-to-date, you also need to update it. Check **vendor/codeigniter4/shield/src/Config/Auth.php** and apply the differences.

## Configuration

Configure **app/Config/AuthJWT.php** for your needs.

### Set the Default Claims

> **Note**
> A payload contains the actual data being transmitted, such as user ID, role,
> or expiration time. Items in a payload is called *claims*.

Set the default payload items to the property `$defaultClaims`.

E.g.:
```php
    public array $defaultClaims = [
        'iss' => 'https://codeigniter.com/',
    ];
```

The default claims will be included in all tokens issued by Shield.

### Set Secret Key

Set your secret key in the `$keys` property, or set it in your `.env` file.

E.g.:
```dotenv
authjwt.keys.default.0.secret = 8XBFsF6HThIa7OV/bSynahEch+WbKrGcuiJVYPiwqPE=
```

> It needs more than 256 bits random string. You can get a secure random string
> with the following command:

Reviewer: I think we should show this in a larger context so that users have no doubt about how it works.

```suggestion
It needs at least 256 bits random string. The length of the secret depends on the 
algorithm we use. The default one is `HS256`, so to ensure that the hash value is 
secure and not easily guessable, the secret key should be at least as long as the 
hash function's output - 256 bits (32 bytes). You can get a secure random string 
with the following command:
```

Author: Thanks! It is true.

Set the default payload items to the property `$defaultClaims`.

E.g.:
```php
    public array $defaultClaims = [
        'iss' => 'https://codeigniter.com/',
    ];
```

The default claims will be included in all tokens issued by Shield.

### Set Secret Key

Set your secret key in the `$keys` property, or set it in your `.env` file.

E.g.:
```dotenv
authjwt.keys.default.0.secret = 8XBFsF6HThIa7OV/bSynahEch+WbKrGcuiJVYPiwqPE=
```

It needs at least 256 bits random string. The length of the secret depends on the 
algorithm we use. The default one is `HS256`, so to ensure that the hash value is 
secure and not easily guessable, the secret key should be at least as long as the 
hash function's output - 256 bits (32 bytes). You can get a secure random string 
with the following command:

```console
php -r 'echo base64_encode(random_bytes(32));'
```

> **Note**
> The secret key is used for signing and validating tokens.

## Issuing JWTs

To use JWT Authentication, you need a controller that issues JWTs.

Here is a sample controller. When a client posts valid credentials (email/password),
it returns a new JWT.

```php
// Routes.php

> $routes->post('auth/jwt', '\App\Controllers\Auth\LoginController::jwtLogin');

Author: Done.

> 

Author: Why? Routes.php does not have `declare(strict_types=1)` by default.

> 

Reviewer 2: Kenjis I meant to add in the controller(LoginController).

> 

Author: Done.

// LoginController.php
namespace App\Controllers\Auth;

use App\Controllers\BaseController;
use CodeIgniter\API\ResponseTrait;
use CodeIgniter\HTTP\ResponseInterface;
use CodeIgniter\Shield\Authentication\Authenticators\Session;
use CodeIgniter\Shield\Authentication\JWTManager;
use CodeIgniter\Shield\Authentication\Passwords;
use CodeIgniter\Shield\Config\AuthSession;

class LoginController extends BaseController
{
    use ResponseTrait;

    /**
     * Authenticate Existing User and Issue JWT.
     */
    public function jwtLogin(): ResponseInterface
    {
        // Get the validation rules
        $rules = $this->getValidationRules();

        // Validate credentials
        if (! $this->validateData($this->request->getPost(), $rules)) {

>             return $this->failValidationErrors($this->validator->getErrors(), 422);

Reviewer 2: ```php
return $this->failValidationErrors($this->validator->getErrors(), 422);
```
Here, 422 cannot be a `int`. Maybe using `setStatusCode(422)` is better.
Considering that I don't know if you intended to set the status code or just a 422 error, I didn't add the change suggestion.

(https://github.com/datamweb/CodeIgniter4/blob/e151d3a25f3ed6a2ff29d022499ed21cd3ade259/system/API/ResponseTrait.php#L238-L248)

Author: Thanks! You are correct.

422 came from https://github.com/codeigniter4/shield/blob/779bb12aac715460abde88d84e02bab9776b96ad/docs/guides/mobile_apps.md?plain=1#L44
But it seems the code is not good for.

> [15.5.21. ](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#section-15.5.21)[422 Unprocessable Content](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-422-unprocessable-content)
>
> The 422 (Unprocessable Content) status code indicates that the server understands the content type of the request content (hence a [415 (Unsupported Media Type)](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#status.415) status code is inappropriate), and the syntax of the request content is correct, but it was unable to process the contained instructions. For example, this status code can be sent if an XML request content contains well-formed (i.e., syntactically correct), but semantically erroneous XML instructions.
>
> http://www.iana.org/assignments/http-status-codes/http-status-codes.xhtml
https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#section-15.5.21

Author: Changed the code.

Reviewer 2: > 422 came from

There, too, it seems that it should change.

        }

        // Get the credentials for login
        $credentials             = $this->request->getPost(setting('Auth.validFields'));
        $credentials             = array_filter($credentials);
        $credentials['password'] = $this->request->getPost('password');

        /** @var Session $authenticator */
        $authenticator = auth('session')->getAuthenticator();

        // Check the credentials
        $result = $authenticator->check($credentials);
        if (! $result->isOK()) {
            return $this->failUnauthorized($result->reason());
        }

>         // Login is successful.

Reviewer 2: The successful/unsuccessful login of the user must be recorded in the database. Even if it is only to receive a token, in any case, the user will login first with credentials. Also, pay attention to this issue, we cannot use filter `session` /`tokens` on **auth/jwt**.

Author: If we use `$authenticator->attempt($credentials)`, the login attempt will be stored in the database.
But it adds auth data in the session. The client is actually logged in with the Session Authenticator.

I thought the client does not need to be logged in actually, the current code just checks the credentials.

But I found that even if the user is banned, a new JWT will be issued.

        /** @var JWTManager $manager */
        $manager = service('jwtmanager');

        // Generate JWT and return to client
        $jwt = $manager->generateToken($user);

        return $this->respond([
            'access_token' => $jwt,
        ]);
    }

    /**
     * Returns the rules that should be used for validation.
     *
     * @return array<string, array<string, array<string>|string>>
     * @phpstan-return array<string, array<string, string|list<string>>>
     */
    protected function getValidationRules(): array
    {
        return setting('Validation.login') ?? [
            'email' => [
                'label' => 'Auth.email',
                'rules' => config(AuthSession::class)->emailValidationRules,
            ],
            'password' => [
                'label'  => 'Auth.password',
                'rules'  => 'required|' . Passwords::getMaxLenghtRule(),
                'errors' => [
                    'max_byte' => 'Auth.errorPasswordTooLongBytes',
                ],
            ],
        ];
    }
}
```

You could send a request with the existing user's credentials by curl like this:

```console
curl --location 'http://localhost:8080/auth/jwt' \

> --header 'Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded' \

Reviewer 2: If I were the author of this topic, I would write the code so that the data is sent as **JSON**.

Author: Changed to JSON request.

Reviewer 2: thanks!
